Non fungible verses (#10)
graalvm/workshops: native-image/non-fungible-verses/README.md

<img src="https://www.graalvm.org/resources/img/home/logo_mobile_openmenu.svg"
alt="GraalVM logo"
width="200px">

# Non Fungible Verses
(Because Web3.0 needs procedurally generated poetry as well as monkey GIFs)

## Introduction

The aims of this lab are:
1. To introduce you to some of the capabilities of the Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI) always free tier.
2. To show you how using [GraalVM Native Image](https://docs.oracle.com/en/graalvm/enterprise/22/docs/reference-manual/native-image/) can help you make the most of your free tier allocation.

### OCI "Always Free" Tier

[Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI)](https://www.oracle.com/cloud/) is Oracle's next-generation cloud, designed to run any application, faster and more securely, for less.

OCI has a free tier, which is composed of two parts:

> - A free trial of a broad set of OCI services limited by time (30 day) or consumption ($300) limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A free trial of a broad set of OCI services limited by time (30 days) or consumption ($300) limit.
```

- A set of ["always free"](https://www.oracle.com/cloud/free/#always-free) services that you can use for an unlimited time.

This lab is going to use two services from the "always free" tier to develop and deploy an application.

> We're going to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You're going to
```

- develop and run the application on an ARM-based [Ampere A1 Compute](https://www.oracle.com/cloud/compute/arm/ VM.
- use the OCI [Autonomous JSON Database](https://www.oracle.com/autonomous-database/autonomous-json-database/) service to store the application's data.

> The application is built using Spring Boot.  It procedually generates "poems", and stores them as JSON documents in the autonomous JSON database (AJD).  We can make each generated poems publicly accessible via a unique URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application is built using Spring Boot.  It procedually generates "poems", and stores them as JSON documents in the autonomous JSON database (AJD).  Each generated poem is publicly accessible via a unique URL.
```

> For a full Web3 experince you can let people pay for the privilege of recording a transaction on a blockchain that includes the URL of a "poem", thereby "owning" the "digital collectible" non - fungible verse (NFV).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a full Web3 experince you can let people pay for the privilege of recording a transaction on a blockchain that includes the URL of a "poem", thereby "owning" the "digital collectible" non-fungible verse (NFV).
```

- Add the Spring Boot application to a Docker Image and run it
- Build a native executable from this application, using GraalVM Native Image 
- Add the native executable to a Docker Image
- Shrink your application docker image size with GraalVM Native Image and Distroless containers 

>Note: If you see the laptop icon in the lab, this means you need to do something such as enter a command. Keep an eye out for it.

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```
# This is where you will need to do something
```

## Lab Prerequisites

Before starting this lab, you must have:

* An OCI tenancy - a trial tenancy will do, as the lab can be run using always free services.

## Provisioning OCI services

1. Log into your OCI tenancy
2. Select or create a compartment to work in (working in the root compartment is a bad idea)

### Compute VM

Create a compute instance
- shape: VM.Standard.A1.Flex
- OCPU: 2
- RAM: 12GB
- Image: vanilla Oracle Linux 8

Once the VM is up and running, SSH into it and carry out the following steps:
* Install [GraalVM version 22 or greater, JDK17+](https://www.graalvm.org/downloads/) - You can use either the Community or Enterprise Edition 

> * Install the `native-image` tool (see [Native Images](https://www.graalvm.org/22.0/docs/getting-started/#native-images))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Install the `native-image` tool (see [Native Image](https://www.graalvm.org/22.0/docs/getting-started/#native-image))
```

> * In your `.bashrc` file, set `JAVA_HOME` to point to your GraalVM installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In your _.bashrc_ file, set `JAVA_HOME` to point to your GraalVM installation
```

* stop & disable the firewall of the VM (normally this isn't recommended)

> * In the security list for the VCN Subnet of your VM, add an ingress rule for TCP traffic on port 8080.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the security list for the VCN Subnet of your VM, add an ingress rule for TCP traffic on port 8080
```

### Autonomous JSON Database

Create an AJD instance with the default settings.

Note your admin password.

> Once the database is up and running, click on "Database Actions".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the database is up and running, click *Database Actions*.
```

> In the "Database Actions" tab, click on "Restful Services and SODA".  Copy the base URL.  In the `.bashrc` file of the compute VM, set `$ORDS_BASE_URL` to the base URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the *Database Actions* tab, click *Restful Services and SODA*.  Copy the base URL.  In the `.bashrc` file of the compute VM, set `$ORDS_BASE_URL` to the base URL.
```

> Click on "Database Users".  Create a new user.  In the `.bashrc` file of the compute VM, set `$ORDS_USER` and `$ORDS_PASSWORD` to the username and password of the user you have created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click *Database Users*.  Create a new user.  In the `.bashrc` file of the compute VM, set `$ORDS_USER` and `$ORDS_PASSWORD` to the username and password of the user you have created.
```

> Log out of "Database Actions", and back in as the user you just created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log out of *Database Actions*, and then log in as the user you just created.
```

> Click on JSON.  Create a collection.  In the `.bashrc` file of the compute VM, set `$JSON_COLLECTION_NAME` to the name of the collection you just created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click *JSON*.  Create a collection.  In the `.bashrc` file of the compute VM, set `$JSON_COLLECTION_NAME` to the name of the collection you just created.
```

> The `.bashrc` file of the compute VM should look something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of the _.bashrc_ file of the compute VM should look something like:
```

```
# .bashrc

# Source global definitions
if [ -f /etc/bashrc ]; then
	. /etc/bashrc
fi

# User specific environment
if ! [[ "$PATH" =~ "$HOME/.local/bin:$HOME/bin:" ]]
then
    PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$HOME/bin:$PATH"
fi
export PATH

# Uncomment the following line if you don't like systemctl's auto-paging feature:
# export SYSTEMD_PAGER=

# User specific aliases and functions
export JAVA_HOME="/opt/graalvm-ee-java17-22.3.0"
export PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$PATH
export ORDS_BASE_URL="https://nglqexb3yfmaqv5-web3db.adb.us-phoenix-1.oraclecloudapps.com/ords/"
export ORDS_USER="cyberpoet"
export ORDS_PASSWORD="September_2022"
export JSON_COLLECTION_NAME="poetry"
```

In your SSH terminal(s) run `source .bashrc`.

## **STEP 1**: Meet Our Sample Java Application

> In this lab you are going to build a simple application with a very minimal REST-based API. You are then going to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This lab describes how to build a simple application with a very minimal REST-based API.  
```

> containerise the application, using Docker. First, take a quick look at your simple application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lab then shows how to containerise the application, using Docker. First, take a quick look at your simple application.
```

> We have provided the source code and build scripts for this application in _native-image/containerisation/lab/src_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code and build scripts for this application are in _native-image/containerisation/lab/src_.
```

to generate native executables using GraalVM Native Image).

The application has three classes:

* `com.example.demo.DemoApplication`: The main Spring Boot class that also defines the HTTP endpoint `/jibber`
* `com.example.demo.Jabberwocky`: A utility class that implements the logic of the application
* `com.example.demo.DBRestClient`: A class that reads from and writes to the Autonomous JSON Database.

So, what does the application do?

If you call the endpoint `/jibber`, it will return some nonsense verse generated
in the style of the [Jabberwocky poem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jabberwocky) by Lewis Carroll. The program achieves this
by using a [Markov Chain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_chain) to produce a model of the original poem (this is essentially a statistical model). 
This model is then used to generate new text.

If you call the endpoint `/mint` it will write a new "poem" to the collection in the AJD.

If you call the endpoint `/read` it will retrieve all the poems from the collection.

If you call the endpoint `/read/{uuid}` it will retrieve the poem with the specified `uuid` if it exists.

> In the example application, you provide it with the text of the poem, then generate a model of the text which the application then uses to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example application, you provide it with the text of the poem, then it generates a model of the text which the application then uses to 
```

> generate a new text that is similar to the original text. We are using the [RiTa](https://rednoise.org/rita/) library to do the heavy lifting for us--it supports building and using Markov Chains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generate a new text that is similar to the original text. The [RiTa](https://rednoise.org/rita/) library performs the heavy lifting for us--it supports building and using Markov Chains.
```

Below are two snippets from the utility class `com.example.demo.Jabberwocky` that builds the model. The `text` variable

> contains the text of the original poem. This snippet shows how we create the model and then populate it with `text`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contains the text of the original poem. This snippet shows how to create the model and then populate it with `text`.
```

This is called from the class constructor

> and we define the class to be a [Singleton](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/3.0.0.M3/reference/html/ch04s04.html#beans-factory-scopes-singleton)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the class is defined to be a [Singleton](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/3.0.0.M3/reference/html/ch04s04.html#beans-factory-scopes-singleton)
```

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
cd native-image/containerisation/lab
./mvnw clean package
```

This will generate an "executable" JAR file, one that contains all of the application's dependencies as well as a correctly configured `MANIFEST`
file. You can run this JAR file and then use `curl` to call the application's endpoint to see what you get in return.

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
# Run the application in the background
java -jar ./target/jibber-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar &
```

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
# Call the endpoint
curl http://localhost:8080/jibber
```

Did you get the some nonsense verse back? OK, so now that you have a built a working application, terminate
it and move on to containerising it.

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
# Bring the application back to the foreground
fg
# Terminate it with : <ctrl-c>
<ctrl-c>
```

## **STEP 2**: Containerising Your Java Application with Docker

Containerising your Java application as a Docker container is straightforward. You can build

> a new Docker image based on one that contains a JDK distribution. So, for this tutorial you will use a container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a new Docker image based on one that contains a JDK distribution. So, for this lab you will use a container
```

EXPOSE 8080

# Copy the JAR file from the `target` directory into the root of the image
COPY ${JAR_FILE} app.jar 

# Run Java when starting the container
ENTRYPOINT ["java"]

# Pass in the parameters to the Java command that make it load and run your executable JAR file
CMD ["-jar","app.jar"]
```

The Dockerfile to containerise your Java application can be found in the directory _native-image/containerisation/lab/00-containerise_.

To build a Docker image containing your application, run the following commands from your terminal:

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
# Build a Docker Image
docker build -f ./00-containerise/Dockerfile \
             --build-arg JAR_FILE=./target/jibber-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-exec.jar \
             -t jibber:jdk.01 .
```

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
# List the newly built image
docker images | head -n2
```

You should see your newly built image listed. Run this image as follows:

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
docker run --rm -d --name "jibber-jdk" -p 8080:8080 jibber:jdk.01
```

> Then call the endpoint as you did before--you may need to wait for a few seconds before doing to allow the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then call the endpoint as you did before--you may need to wait for a few seconds before doing so to allow the
```

```bash
docker logs jibber-jdk
```

For example, in our experiments the Java application started up in 3.896s -- here is the extract from our logs (Note: the time taken to startup 
will vary from machine to machine):

```
2022-03-09 19:48:09.511  INFO 1 --- [           main] com.example.demo.DemoApplication         : Started DemoApplication in 3.896 seconds (JVM running for 4.583)
```

Before going any further in the lab, terminate your container:

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
docker kill jibber-jdk
```

You can also query Docker to get the size of the container image. Run the following commands in your terminal:

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
size_in_bytes=`docker inspect -f "{{ .Size }}" jibber:jdk.01`
echo $((size_in_bytes/1024/1024))
```

This prints the size of the image in MBs. In our experiments, the size was 569MB.

## **STEP 3**: Building a Native Executable

So far you have:

1. Built a Spring Boot application with a HTTP endpoint, `/jibber`
2. Successfully containerised it

Now you can create a native executable from your application using GraalVM Native Image. The native executable

> is going to two interesting characteristics, namely:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is going to exhibit two interesting characteristics, namely:
```

run the following command and look for the startup time:

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```bash
docker logs jibber-native
```
In our experiments, the native executable started up in 0.074s (compared to 3.896s for the Java application). A big improvement!

```
2022-03-09 19:44:12.642  INFO 1 --- [           main] com.example.demo.DemoApplication         : Started DemoApplication in 0.667 seconds (JVM running for 0.779)
```

Clean up by terminating the running container.

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```shell
docker kill jibber-distroless
```

Great! It worked. But how small, or large, is your container? Use the following commands to check the image size:

![](images/RMIL_Technology_Laptop_Bark_RGB_50.png#input)
```shell
size_in_bytes=`docker inspect -f "{{ .Size }}" jibber:distroless.01`
echo $((size_in_bytes/1024/1024))
```

In our experiments, we saw a size of around 82MB, compared to 171MB for an Oracle Linux 8 
image. So we have shrunk the container by a lot. A long way down from our starting size, for 
the Java container, of almost 600MB.

## Summary

> We hope you have enjoyed this lab and learnt a few things along the way. We've looked at how you can containerise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you have enjoyed this lab and learnt a few things along the way. You've seen how to containerise
```

> a Java application. Then we've seen how to convert that Java application into a native executable, which starts significantly 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a Java application. Then you've converted that Java application into a native executable, which starts significantly 
```

faster than the Java application. You then containerised the native executable and have seen how the size of the 
Docker image, with your native executable in it, is much smaller than the Java Docker Image.

> Finally, we looked at how we can build a mostly-statically linked native executable with Native Image. These can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you saw how to build a mostly-statically linked native executable with Native Image. These can be
```

> packaged in smaller containers, such as Distroless and these let us shrink the size of the Docker Image even further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packaged in smaller containers, such as Distroless and these let you shrink the size of the Docker Image even further.
```
